# Artificial intelligence and chat services

We felt the need to put this in a separate sub-chapter because this is a very
important topic. This chapter is our way of looking out for you! 

This will start negatively, but we will have a part of this section dedicated to
_good_ uses for AI in your studies! The debate around AI is complex and
intricate. It's not a black-and-white issue which is what this chapter's about.
We want to highlight it's weaknesses, it's strengths, and the risks of using
them excessively.

In recent years, the usage of AI assistants in the field of computer science has
truly exploded. Several options are available, all of which can assist you in
your programming. Asking a chatbot a question such as "Write a program that
calculates X digits of pi in Python" can provide a useful scaffold for your own
code. 

However, AI tools also come with risks. Most courses expect you to be able to
program, write, and demonstrate your engineering skills without AI tools. They
are rarely allowed during exams and only sometimes permitted in labs. If you are
unsure whether you are allowed to use them, ask your teacher. Using tools that
are not permitted by the examiner could result in suspension from your studies!

You might have heard about how big companies want to use AI and how they expect
programmers to be able to use these chat services. But what usually isn't
included in the headlines is that they mean as a _tool_. 

Just like google can be a tool to help you learn things, so can AI chat
services. But just like google, if you search up code that you didn't write and
turn it in, that's a form of plagiarism. 

You might question calling it plagiarism, but the way AI, or large language
models work is they are trained on large sets of data. For programming this
means they are trained on other peoples code, this is all the context they have
for programming. Which means all they can do is rewrite and reuse _that_ code
they were trained on. This lets them come up with more complex functions and
string together functions they have been trained on, but it also means someone
else originally wrote that code.

Our goal here isn't to scare you, but we do want you to take this seriously.
This university, like all universities in Sweden takes plagiarism and cheating
very very seriously, and there can be very dire consequences. 

In the same vein, AI doesn't actually understand what it's doing or saying. That
might sound like a surprise, but what AI does is string together things it has
been trained on. This is why it can be very bad for math, or for something like
counting things. As an example the ChatGPT models o4-mini and o4 give different
answers for how many letters are in certain words!

On top of this, this is why it can be bad for programming and why you need to
understand the code it tries to give you. For more esoteric, or uncommonly used
languages like Haskell or VHDL, it might not actually know how a function works
and just guess. These sorts of answers are what we call hallucinations. It also
often can't tie together several files or big projects, because it gets lost in
the information it has received. When there's too much information it's easy for
AI to get focused in on one thing or to misunderstand what you've written. It's
great for small tasks and self-contained tools, because it's often similar to
something it has read or been trained on before.

That said, learning to program with AI rather than relying on it can make you a
much stronger and a much more desirable developer. AI can help you get quick
feedback, help you understand why a function isn't doing what you expect. It can
hlep you troubleshoot errors that you don't understand yet. It can give you an
example function, similar to what you want to write. Seeing what a working
function looks like in this language using the same concepts can help you write
your own code. In the same vein it can give you a starting point, what we
usually call a skeleton. It won't contain all the code you need but it can help
you with filler code or to create a structure to follow.

Sometimes documentation can be unclear, or have very few words. Copy the
documentation and ask AI to explain it in plain language. Instead of asking it
to write code to do a certain task, ask it to give you an idea for how that sort
of function could be written! Do you have repetitive code you need to write but
you just need to fill something in? AI can usually do the exact same thing. It's
great at that sort of thing! When you give it something to write again and
again, or something to summarize, it can be very effective. These ideas for how
to use AI are how we want you to learn to use AI if you want to do so. AI is a
supportive tool, it's not a shortcut.

But _you_ need to understand what it does. _You_ need to be able to write the
code yourself. _You_ are the programmer, not the AI. It is easy to write code
that looks good, especially for inexperienced programmers. However, upon further
inspection by an experienced examiner, it could be obvious that it was written
by AI. 

It’s easy to produce code that looks good, especially if you’re new to
programming. But teachers and examiners can often recognize AI generated code
and it’s usually obvious when a student can’t explain or replicate what they've
submitted. 

AI is however a very powerful tool. For example, the text above was drafted by
the authors and then rewritten for coherence and structure by ChatGPT!
