# Chalmers Apps

Chalmers has a digital platform to help you use some of the programs you need
for your courses. It's called [Chalmers Apps](https://apps.chalmers.se) and is
currently being introduced. We don't know to what extent it will be used for
TKDAT, but we will walk you through the basics of it here. One example of a
program that's available on this platform is _DigiFlisp_, which will be used in
one of your courses, "Grundl√§ggande Datorteknik". If you want
Chalmers instructions, they are available
[here](https://www.chalmers.se/utbildning/studentstod/it-support/kor-chalmers-programvaror-pa-din-egen-dator/).

## Setup

{{ begin .windows }}

## AppsAnywhere

On Windows you can login to [Chalmers Apps](https://apps.chalmers.se) using
CID@chalmers.se as your username and the password you set for your CID. The
first time you do this you will be asked if you have installed _AppsAnywhere_.
Click on `Install Now` and it should start downloading. Follow the on screen
instructions. You should now see a pop-up saying "This site is trying to open
AppsAnywhere Launcher". Make sure the checkbox is ticked and click on `Open`.
You might get another pop-up saying that validation failed. In that case, click
on `Retry Validation`. If it succeeds, click on `Close Troubleshooter`. You
should now be finished with the installation. If you see the pop-up asking you
if AppsAnywhere is installed again, just click `I Already Have It`.

{{ end }}

{{ begin .windows .macos }}

## Windows App

On Windows and MacOS you can use a program called "Windows App" to get access to
a remote desktop environment to access the programs. Download it from either the
Microsoft Store or the App Store and login using your CID@chalmer.se and your
CID password. You will now get a welcome screen, click `Skip` in the bottom
right corner. Now you will be presented with a list of virtual desktops that you
can connect to. You should already have one titled "Chalmers Apps". This is the
screen you will see when you start the program the next time.

![](/Assets/apps_anywhere/windows_app.png)

Underneath the card that says "Chalmers Apps", there is a button that says
`Connect`, press it. This will start up you virtual environment with
AppsAnywhere pre-installed and running. When you want to exit the virtual
environment, press the "X" in the toolbar at the top of the screen.

![](/Assets/apps_anywhere/desktop.png)

{{ end }}

{{ begin .linux }}

## Web interface

If you're on Linux, you can only run a remote desktop environment through the
web. Go to [Chalmers Apps](https://apps.chalmers.se) and log in using
CID@chalmers.se and your CID password. From here, click on any program, and then
Launch, and then `Launch the virtual desktop client`. You will be taken to a
list of virtual environments, with one named Chalmers Apps.
Click on it and you should enter into the virtual environment.

![](/Assets/apps_anywhere/web.png)

{{ end }}

## Using it

Now that you are all setup, go to the [Chalmers Apps](https://apps.chalmers.se)
website again (if you're using Windows App or Linux, enter the website in the
virtual desktop) and login as before. Search for the program you want to start
and click on `Launch`. AppsAnywhere should now download the program for you and
launch it once it is ready.

![](/Assets/apps_anywhere/launch.png)

With AppsAnywhere running, you can use it to quickly access Chalmers Apps.
Do this by pressing the up arrow in the task bar and then right clicking on the
AppsAnywhere icon, then pressing "Launch Portal". This should take you to the
website where you can now search for programs and run them.

![](/Assets/apps_anywhere/apps_anywhere.png)
