# Master's programmes

During the 5 year programme called "Civilingenj√∂r" you will be receiving two
degrees, a bachelors degree (Kandidatexamen in swedish) and your master's
degree. Oftentimes you will hear people say "during your bachelors", which
refers to the first 3 years. Some time in early april during your third year
you will get to choose your master's program.

Unfortunately it is hard to share relevant information regarding this choice at
the moment. Currently there is a reworking of the master's programmes at all of
Chalmers in progress. The full plan for it will be available in October and us
at DNS will do our best to share that information then, but if you're reading
this in September 2025 then we suggest coming back here in a year when it's
been updated with the up to date information!

What we can do is give you the small amount of information we have. The master's
are being reworked and plan to be finished in 2027, which means those that
started in 2024 will be the first to experience this new system. It's being
reworked to add extra flexibility and to make the master's programmes more
relevant for the future. They will be a bit more internationally focused with a
division of a major and a minor. This means you'll be able to pick one master's
that you go deep in depth in and a second master's that you'll get the core
courses from.

The reasoning for this is to make that choice a bit simpler, to streamline the
master's programmes and to integrate Chalmers better internationally to make
exchange years simpler.

Earlier you've picked a master's and had lots of room to pick electives at the
same time, which means in effect you could get important courses from several
master's programmes and not just one. By changing it to work in the new way,
this becomes clearer on the international stage, and should make it easier to
study topics you're interested in.
